# Convergence of Policy Iteration Algorithm
#rl/planning/policy-iteration

> Let $(\pi_{k})_{k \geq 0}$ be the sequence generated by the [[Policy Iteration|PI algorithm]].
> - For all $k$, we have that $V^{\pi_{k+1}} \geq V^{\pi_{k}}$ with equality if and only if $V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$.
> - $\lim_{ k \to \infty }||V^{\pi_{k}} - V^{*}||_{\infty} = 0$
> - If the set of policies is finite, the [[Policy Iteration|PI algorithm]] converges in a finite number of iterations.

---
## Proof
> The basic idea behind the proof is that 
> - either we can strictly improve the policy, 
> - or if we cannot, we are already at the optimal policy.

We shall prove each of the claims consecutively.

**Claim-1**: $V^{\pi_{k}} \geq V^{\pi_{k}} \iff V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$
By [[Policy Improvement Theorem]], we already know that $V^{\pi_{k+1}} \geq V^{\pi_{k}}$.
So we need to prove $V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k}} \iff V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$.

**Proof of** $V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k}} \implies V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$
Suppose that instead of strict equality, we have an equality of
$$
V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k}}
$$
Applying $T^{\pi_{k+1}}$ to both sides, 
$$
T^{\pi_{k+1}} \ V^{\pi_{k+1}}
= T^{\pi_{k+1}} V^{\pi_{k}}
$$
As $T^{\pi_{k+1}} V^{\pi_{k}} = T^{*}V^{\pi_{k}}$ by the definition of the [[Policy Iteration|PI algorithm]],
$$
\begin{align}
T^{\pi_{k+1}} \ V^{\pi_{k+1}} 
= T^{\pi_{k+1}} V^{\pi_{k}} 
= T^{*} V^{\pi_{k}} 
= T^{*} V^{\pi_{k+1}}
\end{align}
$$
where in the last step, we used $V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k}}$ again.

By these inequalities, we have
$$
T^{\pi_{k+1}} V^{\pi_{k+1}}
= T^{*} V^{\pi_{k+1}}
$$
As $V^{\pi_{k+1}}$ is the [[Value Function|value function]] of $\pi_{k+1}$, it satisfies the [[Bellman Equation for Value Function|Bellman Equation]] $T^{\pi_{k+1}} V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k+1}}$.
Therefore, we also have
$$
V^{\pi_{k+1}} = T^{*}V^{\pi_{k+1}}
$$
This means that $V^{\pi_{k+1}}$ is a [[Fixed Point]] of $T^{*}$.
But recall that by [[Uniqueness of Fixed Point]] theorem, the fixed point of $T^{*}$ is unique and is equal to $V^{*}$.

So, we must have that
$$
V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{*}
$$

**Proof-2**: $V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*} \implies V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{\pi_{k}}$
If $V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$, then $\pi_{k}$ is an optimal policy.
The [[Greedy Policy|greedy policy]] of $V^{\pi_{k}} = V^{*}$, which is $\pi_{k + 1}$, is still an optimal policy hence $V^{\pi_{k+1}} = V^{*} = V^{\pi_{k}}$.

---
**Claim-2**: $\lim_{ k \to \infty }|| V^{\pi_{k}} - V^{*}|| = 0$
To prove the convergence, recall from [[Policy Improvement Theorem]] that
$$
Q^{\pi_{k+1}} \geq T^{*}Q^{\pi_{k}} \geq Q^{\pi_{k}}
$$

By induction, we can prove that
$$
Q^{\pi_{k+1}} 
\geq T^{*}Q^{\pi_{k}}
\geq T^{*} \ (T^{*}Q^{\pi_{k}})
\geq \dots
\geq (T^{*})^{k} \ Q^{\pi_{0}}
$$

By definition of [[Markov Policy|optimal policy]], we have $Q^{\pi} \leq Q^{*}$ for any $\pi$.
This includes all $\pi_{k}$ generated during the [[Policy Iteration]].
So, $Q^{k+1}$ is sandwiched between $Q^{*}$ and $(T^{*})^{k} \ Q^{\pi_{0}}$.
$$
Q^{*} \geq Q^{\pi_{k+1}} \geq (T^{*})^{k} Q^{\pi_{0}}
$$
This entails that $||Q^{\pi_{k+1}} - Q^{*}||_{\infty} \leq ||(T^{*})^{k} \ Q^{\pi_{0}} - Q^{*}||_{\infty}$.
So we shall show that the RHS $||(T^{*})^{k} \ Q^{\pi_{0}} - Q^{*}||_{\infty}$ converges to $0$.

By [[Contraction of Bellman Operator|contraction property]] of [[Bellman Optimality Operator]], we have
$$
\lim_{ k \to \infty } ||(T^{*})^{k} \ Q^{\pi_{0}} 
- Q^{*}||_{\infty} = 0
$$
Therefore,
$$
\lim_{ k \to \infty } || Q^{\pi_{k}} 
- Q^{*}||_{\infty} = 0
$$
This implies convergence of $V^{\pi_{k}}$ too, as wanted.

---
**Claim-3**: Finite Convergence
If the number of policies is finite, the number of times $Q^{\pi_{k+1}} \geq T^{*}Q^{\pi_{k}} \geq Q^{\pi_{k}}$ can be a strict inequality is going to finite too.

---
## Remarks
- We have proven that the [[Policy Iteration|PI Algorithm]] converges to the [[Markov Policy|optimal policy]] in finite no. of iterations whenever the no. of policies is finite.
- If the [[Markov Decision Process (MDP)|state space]] $\mathcal{S}$ and the [[Markov Decision Process (MDP)|action space]] $\mathcal{A}$ are finite, the number of policies are finite and is $|\mathcal{A}|^{|\mathcal{S}|}$.
- Even though finite, this can be very large.
  For $10 \times 10$ grid with $3$ actions, each state has $4^{100} \approx 1.6 \times 10^{60}$ possible policies
- In practice though, the [[Policy Iteration|PI algorithm]] converges faster.
- A much better analysis can be found in [[Fast Convergence of Policy Iteration]].

---
## See Also
- [[Policy Iteration]]
- [[Policy Improvement Theorem]]
- [[Fast Convergence of Policy Iteration]]
- [[Uniqueness of Fixed Point]]
- [[Bellman Equation for Value Function]]

